# Semantic Search-Powered US Census Data Extraction Tool
A tool that selects relevant US Census variables based on user-supplied free-text search terms. Multiple terms may be provided. Better documentation to come.

## Requirements
- Python 3 and the following packages:
    - duckdb
    - censusdata
    - us
    - python-dotenv
- Census data API key, see [The census API documentation.](https://www.census.gov/data/developers/data-sets.html)

## Basic usage
1. Request a Census API key if you don't already have one
2. Download this repo and extract locally
3. Create a file in the repo directory/same directory as the Python scripts called ".env" with a valid census API key and some query parameters. The included example_env.txt could be used as a template. In that case, fill in your values and rename the file to ".env"
4. Select census variables to download using "select_vars.py":
    ```
    python select_vars.py pattern [,pattern]*
    ```
The script prints a JSON object with the variable names as the top-level keys. The values are objects with keys "label" and "name". "name" is the column name that will be used for the returned data. An example invocation:
```
$python select_vars.py work
{"DP03_0094E": {"label": "Median earnings for female full-time, year-round workers (dollars)", "name": "DP03_0094E"}, "DP03_0092E": {"label": "Median earnings for workers (dollars)", "name": "DP03_0092E"}, "DP03_0093E": {"label": "Median earnings for male full-time, year-round workers (dollars)", "name": "DP03_0093E"}, "DP03_0025E": {"label": "Mean travel time to work (minutes)", "name": "DP03_0025E"}, "DP03_0048E": {"label": "Government workers", "name": "DP03_0048E"}, "DP03_0047E": {"label": "Private wage and salary workers", "name": "DP03_0047E"}, "DP03_0050E": {"label": "Unpaid family workers", "name": "DP03_0050E"}, "DP03_0049E": {"label": "Self-employed in own not incorporated business workers", "name": "DP03_0049E"}}
 ```
The intent is that this tool will help remap variable names when desired. By default, the names as retrieved from the census API are used.
## Citation
If you make use of this tool in your work, please use the following citation:

D. R. Harris and N. Seyedtalebi, "Extracting Semantics from Census-based Reference Data," 2021 IEEE 15th International Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC), Laguna Hills, CA, USA, 2021, pp. 88-89, doi: 10.1109/ICSC50631.2021.00022.

Abstract: We present preliminary findings in extracting semantics from reference data generated by the United States Census Bureau. US Census reference data is based upon surveys designed to collect demographics and other socioeconomic factors by geographical regions. These data sets contain thousands of variables; this complexity makes the reference data difficult to learn, query, and integrate into analyses. Researchers often avoid working directly with US Census reference data and instead work with census-derived extracts capturing a much smaller subset of records. We propose to use natural language processing to extract the semantics of census-based reference data and to map census variables to known ontologies. This semantic processing reduces the large volume of variables into more manageable sets of conceptual variables that can be organized by meaning and semantic type.
